---
title: "Today I Learned: zsh job control option"
authors: [masto]
---

I'm a fairly heavy user of job control in the shell. By which I mean one thing I
do constantly is press `control-z` to suspend what I'm doing - reading a man
page, editing a file, etc. - in order to run another command, and then use `fg`
to resume.

<!-- truncate -->

Today I tried to do that and discovered that `control-z` didn't work. It did
nothing. Or, rather, it just sent a literal `control-z`. Things sometimes get
into a weird state, so I opened a new shell and tried again. Nope, nothing. Then
I tried it in `bash` and it worked fine. I went back to `zsh` and discovered
that running `fg` would also return the error:

```none
fg: no job control in this shell.
```

After poking around the manual for a while, I found the option to tell `zsh` not
to read any of the startup files: `zsh -f`. When I used that, I had job control
again. So it was pretty obviously something to do with
[all of the fancy stuff](/2022-12-31-dotfiles-cleanup/index.md) I recently set
up.

A little searching led me to a
[bug report](https://github.com/zplug/zplug/issues/322) from 2016 that had the
answer. `zplug` disables job control while it's doing some tasks (apparently to
avoid printing messages about them). It's supposed to reenable it afterward, but
sometimes a lock file gets left behind that permanently prevents this from
happening. The solution is quite simple: `rm $_zplug_lock[job]`. If you can find
it.

I'm also now aware that job control can be turned on and off with the `monitor`
option, so I guess this was a valuable learning experience.
